Verifying the Authorship of

Saikaku Ihara's Arashi ha

Mujyo Monogatari in Early Modern Japanese Literature: A Quantitative Approach

Ayaka Uesaka

auesaka@mail.doshisha.ac.jp

Organization for Research Initiatives and Development Doshisha University,
Japan

Introduction

This study focuses on Arashi ha Mujyd Monogatari (“The Tale of Transient
Popular Kabuki Actor Arashi's Life”; 1688), a novel from the early modern
Japanese literature, written by Saikaku Ihara (1642-93). It is a first work of
a Kabuki actor’s life in Japan (Kabuki is a traditional stage arts performed
exclusively by male actors with the accompaniment of live music and songs).
Then we will examine the “authorship problem” in Saikaku’s works using the
tools of quantitative analysis.

Saikaku was a national author whose novels were published in 17th century.
Saikaku’s works are known for their significance for developing Japanese
contemporary novels. One recent hypothesis has stated that he wrote twenty-four
novels, however, it remained unclear which works were really written by Saikaku
except Kdshoku ichidai otoko (“The Life of an Amorous Man”; 1682), Shoen
Okagami (“The Great Mirror of Female Beauty”; 1684), Koshoku ichidai onna (“The
Life of an Amorous Woman”; 1686), Koshoku gonin onna (“Love Stories about Five
Women ”; 1686). Although the study of his works has continued, these
fundamental doubts about his authorship remain.

Meanwhile, the potential of quantitative analysis of textual data and the
related field of the digital humanities have also dramatically advanced.
However, quantitative analysis of Japanese classical works has been behind. It
has been a problem due to complications regarding development of morphological
analysis software and also delayed digitalization of Japanese classical works.

Previous Studies

Found by Noma in 1941

Noma found and introduced Arashi ha Mujyo Monogatari in 1941. He mentioned that
the novel was actually written by Saikaku, for the following reasons (Noma,
1941 and 1964). (1) The handwriting of the novel belongs to Saikaku; and (2) He
found a similar writing error in Arashi ha Mujyo Monogatari and Saikaku’s work.

Arguments for Saikaku's authorship

The handwriting is not crucial in deciding if they are Saikaku's novels.
According to Emoto et al. (1996), among his twenty-four novels, the handwriting
of nineteen works does not belong to Saikaku. Moreover, Saikaku made a fair
copy of other writer’s draft such as Kindai Yasa Inja (“The story of a hermit”;
1686) by Kyosen Sairoken (? -?) and Shin Yoshiwara Tsurezure (“The book of
commentary on the licensed quarters of a certain area”; 1689) by Sutewaka
Isogai (? -?).Mori (1955) has argued that Saikaku’s novels are an apocryphal
work mainly written by Dansui Hojo (16631711) except Koshoku ichidai otoko.

As he gained a national audience, Saikaku was pressured to write on demand and
in great volume. At first he wrote only one or two novels a year, however in
the two years from 1687 to 1688 he published twelve books, with a total of
sixty-two volumes. Saikaku’s style and approach also changed at this point
(Shirane, 2004).

It is possible that Saikaku had some assistance (Nakamura,1969). Arashi ha
Mujyo Monogatari was published in this period. Moreover, Arashi ha
Mujyo Monogatari does not have a preface, epilogue, signature, namely it is not
specified that it was written by Saikaku. Despite the authorship problem of 
Arashi ha Mujyo Monogatari remains unanswered, little work has been done about
it. For that reason, this study reexamines the authorship of Arashi ha Mujyo
Monogat-ari using a quantitative approach.

Databases

Database of Saikaku's Works

First, we digitized all the text of 120 works of Saikaku (24 novels, 80 poem
books, etc.) based on the first edition of each works (see Figure 1). Second,
Since Japanese sentences are not separated by spaces, we built the rule with
early modern Japanese researchers, who were editors of Shinpen Saikaku Zenshu
(“The new complete works of Saikaku”). Finally, based on this rule, we added
spaces between the words in all of the sentences. In addition, the grammatical
categories’ information was added. According to our database, there are 710,355
words contained in his 120 works.

[084-1]

Database of Dansui's Works

We also made the database of Dansui’s novels Shi-kido Otuzumi (“The Great Drum
of Love"; 1687), Chuya yojin ki (“The Night and Day of Precaution"; 1707) and 
Budo hariai Okagami (‘The Great Mirror of Martial Arts"; 1709), using same
methods and rules of Saikaku’s database. According to our database, there are
53,838 words contained in these works. The next section considers the doubts
about the authorship problem of Arashi ha Mujyo Monogatari.

Analysis and Results

In our previous studies, we have analyzed Saikaku and Dansui’s novels, and have
clarified the following two points by extracting their writing style
using principal component analysis (PCA) and cluster analysis (hierarchical
clustering): (1) A comparison of the Saikaku and Dansui’s novels showed ten
prominent features: the grammatical categories, words, nouns, particles, verbs,
adjectives, adverbs, adnominal adjectives, grammatical categories bigrams
and particle bigrams (Uesaka, 2015, 2016); and (2) Using these features, we
analyzed Saikaku's four posthumous novels (many researchers have raised
questions about the authorship, because these novels were edited and published
by Dansui after Saikaku’s death). We found these four posthumous works
indicated same features of Saikaku’s novel, therefore we concluded that
these four posthumous novels belonged to Saikaku (Uesaka^-Murakami,2015ab,
Uesaka, 2016).

In this study, we compared Arashi ha Mujyo Monogatari to Saikaku and Dansui, as
authenticated novels of them (see Table 1) by ten prominent features using PCA
and cluster analysis to see the differences in each novels. The analysis
revealed differences of writing style between Arashi ha Mujyo Monogatari
, Saikaku and Dansui.

┌────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│Saikaku’s   │Kôshoku ichidai otoko, Shôen Okagami, Kôshoku ichidai otnna and │
│            │Kôshoku gonin onna                                              │
│novels      │                                                                │
├────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│Dansui's    │Shikidou otsuzumi, Chuyayoujin ki and Budou hariai okagami      │
│novels      │                                                                │
└────────────┴────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

Table 1: The authenticated novels of Saikaku and Dansui

We conducted PCA with correlation matrix and these

novels fall into three groups: Saikaku, Dansui and

Arashi ha Mujyd Monogatari (see Figure 2). Furthermore, we conducted a cluster
analysis. There also appears to be a considerable difference among

Arashi ha Mujyd Monogatari, Saikaku and Dansui’s novels. When calculating
distances between each novels, we normalized the frequency of each words, and
used the Kullback-Leibler divergence and the algorithm from the Ward method.
Furthermore, we obtained similar result of the other nine features:
the grammatical categories, words, nouns, particles, verbs, adjectives,
adverbs, adnominal adjectives and particle bigrams.

Kullback-Leibler distance

[084-2]

nb = 3

hclust (*, "ward.D2")

Figure 2: PCA results for grammatical categories bigrams

┌────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────┐
│                        │D:Chuyayoujinki                      │
├────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────┤
│                        │D:BudDou:ShharikiaiidokuOagtasumizumi│
├────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────┤
│Arashihamujyoumonogatari│S:Kousyokugoninonna                  │
├────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────┤
│                        │S:Kousyokuichidaionna                │
│                        │                                     │
│                        │S:Kousyokuichidaiotoko               │
├────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────┤
│                        │S:Shoenokagami                       │
└────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────┘

-6 -4 -2 0 2 PC1( 47.256 % )

Figure 3: Cluster analysis results for grammatical categories bigrams

Discussion and Conclusion

When comparing ten prominent features using PCA

and cluster analysis, we found that Arashi ha Mujyd Monogatari was
significantly different from Saikaku and Dansui's works. A number of features
indicate that Arashi ha Mujyd Monogatari is not Saikaku and Dansui. In order to
clarify Arashi ha Mujyd Monogatari's author, we need to conduct more detailed
analysis. It is necessary to add the data of other writers with the possibility
of the author of Arashi ha Mujyd Monogatari, for example, Kiseki Ejima
(1666-1735) and Ichiroemon Nishimura(?-1969). We have been building
the database of these author's 13 novels, and we will do comparisons in the
future study.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Professor Masakatsu Murakami, Professor Hidekazu Banno
and Professor Taka-yuki Mizutani for their help on our research. This work was
mainly supported by the Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS)
Grant-in-Aid for Research Activity Start-up(16H07328).

