A Survey on Research Data at the Faculty of Arts and Humanities of the
University of Cologne

Simone Kronenwett

simone.kronenwett@uni-koeln.de

Cologne Center for eHumanities, Germany

Brigitte Mathiak

mathiak@gmail.com

Cologne Center for eHumanities, Germany

Executive summary

In the course of the digitization of information, research data management has
become one of the most important new areas of research. Universities have to
prepare themselves to provide their academics and researchers with the
necessary infrastructures and services. To identify the current
demands regarding the handling of research data at the Faculty of Arts and
Humanities of the University of Cologne, the Data Center for the Humanities
conducted an online survey in 2016 in cooperation with the Office of the Dean
of the Faculty of Arts and Humanities as well as the University and Library of
Cologne. The enquiry aimed to characterize the present situation and to obtain
information on the demands in the sectors research data management and
consultation services. Our talk will show ongoing developments at the
international and national level in research data management, present the
results of the survey and discuss potential conclusions.

Relevance

One of the most important fields of action in research which is developing
along with the digitalization of information is research data management (RDM).
The universities face the challenge of offering their researchers adequate
structures and services. The managing board of the German universities
organized in the German Rector's Conference (HRK) has identified this as a key
task (HRK 2014 and 2015). Moreover, in the recently published position paper
called "Performance by diversity" the German Council for Scientific Information
Infrastructures (RfII) makes a series of recommendations concerning how
research data should be managed in the future (RfII 2016). The RfII was tasked
by Germany's

Joint Science Conference (GWK) with formulating broad-based recommendations for
the science system in Germany as a whole. In addition, according to estimates
by the German Research Foundation (DFG), up to 90% of the digital generated
research data and results are still getting lost (Winkler-Nees 2011, p. 5) or
"disappear in the drawer" (Kramer 2014) shortly after completion of research
projects and are therefore not available for further use and reuse.

Method

As a structured way to gain information, we decided to follow the six stages
process recommended

for survey research (Muller et al. 2014). In addition, the survey is based on
the relevant articles published in the handbook "Methods of Library and
Information Science" by Umlauf, Fuhles-Ubach & Seadle (Umlauf et al. 2013). The
six steps are briefly explained below.

The Internet survey, the online questionnaire as well as the detailed report
are published on the DCH-Website (http://dch.phil-fak.uni-koeln.de/
umfrage-2016.html; see also Kronenwett 2017).

Research goals and constructs

The goal of the survey is to contribute to the conceptual development of the
Data Center for the Humanities (DCH), which was founded as a central
infrastructure service institution by the faculty dealing with humanities
research data in 2013. In practice, the enquiry aims to characterize the
present situation and to obtain information on the demands in the sectors RDM
and consultation services offered by the DCH in cooperation with the University
and City Library of Cologne (USB), one of the local partners of the DCH.
Another goal was the comparability with other surveys conducted in the field.

Population and sampling

Because RDM should be handled in a way specific to each discipline (Sahle et
al. 2013), the survey targeted only researchers at the Faculty of Arts and
Humanities of the University of Cologne - one of the largest humanities
faculties in Europe. The survey's population is limited to the academic staff
of the Faculty of Arts and Humanities of the University of Cologne. In
particular, the survey focused on researchers who are responsible for
data-driven research projects.

Questionnaire design and biases

Firstly, with regards to content, conceptual and methodical design of the
survey, Internet surveys and online questionnaires on research data at national
and international scientific institutions and research institutes were analyzed
so far available (the website "forschungsdaten.org" offers an overview
regarding national and international surveys on research data). Secondly, the
questionnaire design was tailored and adapted to suit the unique circumstances
which can be found at the Faculty of Arts

and Humanities (DCH 2016, CCeH 2016). Finally, the results of a series of
expert interviews carried out by the DCH with researchers at the Faculty were
taken into account (Blumtritt 2016, p. 16). The questionnaire addresses five
issues, namely (1) research data, (2) use of data archives, (3) support for
research data, (4) discipline and position, (5) interest.

Review and survey pretesting

After a review of the questionnaire with stakeholders, such as the dean's
office, the library and the data protection officer, a test link was sent to 20
potential subjects. This included representatives of all subject groups of the
Faculty of Arts and Humanities (Faculty of Arts and Humanities 2016) as well as
external experts (mostly sociologists and colleagues with RDM-background).
After several feedback loops, the questionnaire was further modified
and optimized.

Implementation and launch

The questionnaire was compiled using Kronenwett & Adolphs online survey tool
(Kronenwett & Adolphs 2017). It was put online from 2016-05-30 to 2016-06-12 (2
weeks). Depending on individual answers the questionnaire contained up to 24
questions.

Data analysis and reporting

The questionnaire was completely answered by 136 participants (out of 191
persons who started the survey) which is 71.20% completion rate. The following
selection of data analysis and reporting takes into account only these
participants (n=136).

Results

Our objective in the compilation of the questionnaire was to answer the
following questions:

1) What research data are available?

2) What is the need for research data?

3) What support do the members of the Faculty of

Arts and Humanities want from the DCH?

Regarding the first question, sustainability and data volume were important to
us. As far as sustainability is concerned, the majority of respondents are
storing their research data on their local computers: 70% work computer, 70%
private computer, multiple responses were possible (see fig. 1). Only 14% are
storing their data in a data archive, a number that is also reflected in other
questions like how many participants can imagine their data being stored in a
data archive.

Where do you usually store your research data (no backup copies)?

[164-1]

Figure 1. Storage places (n=136)

Regarding sustainability standards the given answers are fatal results since
structured access and retrievability of research data are only ensured
in professional data archives. Cloud solutions are also quite popular (35% use
by commercial vendors and 14% of scientific vendors) because they ensure
overall data access and data share. But regarding aspects like data
plausibility, traceability or even long-term preservation they are totally
unsuitable.

This result could be explained by the fact that the participants do not reflect
their approach to sustainability and traceability. The vast majority of the
respondent's self-assessment regarding their own skills in RDM is rated to be
average or even less (71%) (see figure 2).

[164-2]

Figure 2. Self-assessment RDM-skills (n=136)

Sustainability is seen as a problem. 66% of the participants state that data
could be lost when there is no one to be responsible for the website. 60%
fear problems with data conversion. There is some sensibility towards the
issues of finding the data (45%) and documentation of the data (41%). Figure
3 shows all answers concerning problems the participants see with preserving
research data. Interesting is that both privacy and data theft are the
concerns voiced the least frequent (11% each), despite the fact that we
encounter these concerns frequently in our consulting practice. But this could
be an anomaly due to us asking from the user perspective rather than the data
giving perspective which is more typical to our consulting.

Did you get in touch with any of these problems or do you think you will might
get in touch with any of these problems in the future?

other ■(5 88%)

[164-3]

Figure 3. Past and future problems (n=136)

[164-4]

Figure 4. Support and services needed (n=136)

In an effort to improve our services towards the faculty, we also asked which
services should be provided by the DCH. Here legal and technical issues
featured prominently (74% and 73% respectively; also cf. Fig. 4). Requests for
storage (72%) and consultation (66%) on general issues are also in high demand.

Conclusion and outlook

As a result of the survey, we propose the following recommendations for action
for the University of Cologne on the one hand and for the DCH on the
other hand. Together with the local library (USB), the DCH now offers legal
counseling on the subject of research data with a specialized lawyer. We are
currently planning a project for improving the sustainability of living
software systems, since the survey showed that this is an eminent problem in
our faculty. Based on the projected storage space from the survey, we have
negotiated with the computing center to provide that space centrally for all
the members of our faculty.

In our talk, we will give more details on the study and its results and will
also compare it to other surveys conducted internationally. We feel that
surveys of this nature are an important tool to shape strategic decisions made
in institutions concerned with research data.

┌────┬───────────────────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────┐
│    │English                            │                                    │
│CCeH│                                   │German                              │
│    │Cologne Center for eHumanities     │                                    │
├────┼───────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│DCH │Data Center for the Humanities     │Kölner Datenzentrum für die         │
│    │                                   │Geisteswissenschaften               │
├────┼───────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│DFG │German Research Foundation         │Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft     │
├────┼───────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│    │German Institute for International │Deutsches Institut für              │
│DIPF│Educational Research               │Internationale Pädagogische         │
│    │                                   │Forschung                           │
├────┼───────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│GWK │Joint Science Conference of Germany│Gemeinsame Wissenschaftskonferenz   │
├────┼───────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│HRK │German Rectors' Conference         │Hochschulrektorenkonferenz          │
├────┼───────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│LAC │Language Archive Cologne           │-                                   │
├────┼───────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│Rfll│German Council for Scientific      │                                    │
│    │Information Infrastructures        │                                    │
├────┼───────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│RRZK│Regional Computing Center of the   │Regionales Rechenzentrum der        │
│    │University of Cologne              │Universität zu Köln                 │
└────┴───────────────────────────────────┴────────────────────────────────────┘

Figure 5. List of abbreviations used.

