Digital 3D Reconstructions as a Scholarly Area of Digital Humanities -
Scholars, Projects, Implications and Perspectives

Sander Münster

sander.muenster@tu-dresden.de

Technische Universität Dresden, Germany

Abstract

Since an academic discourse on using digital 3D reconstruction tools for
humanities research is still highly application-oriented, an overarching
objective of our research work is to draw a currently missing “big picture” on
digital 3D reconstruction as a research tool in digital humanities by combining
theoretically and practically grounded research parts as well as including
multi-disciplinary perspectives. This article provides an overview of research
work carried out by our department in 12 projects over the past seven years,
namely on (a) scenarios and practices for the employment of digital 3D
reconstruction and visualization methods and approaches for scientific research
in visual humanities, (b) requirements and recommendations for digital tools,
and (c) approaches to teach digital 3D reconstruction methods at university.
The article is intended to contribute to a comprehensive discourse on a unique
epistemology of digital 3D reconstruction in humanities and to deliver related
practically tested implications for software design, teaching and
organizational settings.

Introduction

For more than 30 years, digital 3D modelling and in particular reconstruction
methods have been widely used to support research and education in the
digital humanities, especially but not exclusively on historical architecture.
While technological backgrounds, project opportunities, and methodological
considerations for the ap-plication of digital 3D reconstruction techniques are
widely discussed in literature (e.g. Arnold and Geser, 2008, European
Commission, 2011, Frischer, 2008, Bentkowska-Kafel et al., 2012,

Bentkowska-Kafel, 2013, Kohle, 2013), our interest is to investigate digital 3D
reconstruction as a scholarly area and to derive implications for
further organizational and methodical development. Against this background,
this research work is dedicated to support the dissemination process by
investigating the following research questions:

•    What scenarios and practices exist for the employment of digital methods
and approaches for scientific research within the field of digital 3D
reconstruction, especially in art and architectural history?

•    What are requirements and recommendations for the design of tools
and media related to digital 3D re-construction?

•    How can the use of digital methods and, in

particular, digital 3D    reconstruction

techniques in visual human-ities be learned and taught?

Research

Against the background of these research interests, our research activities
include to investigate (1) a scholarly community, (2) usage practices
occurring with-in single projects and to gain implications for an appropriate
organizational development. Moreover, practical application and a development
of implications for (4) the conception and creation of a user-centered design
of software tools and environments for digital humanities scholars and an (5)
implementation in student education are in focus. Research methods and
approaches used within the described research activity mainly derive from
social and information sciences as well as from science and technology studies
(cf. Hackett et al., 2008, Boczkowski and Lievrouw, 2008, pp. 955) and comprise
e.g. bibliometric analysis (cf. Vinkler, 1996), quantitative and qualitative
empirical analysis as well as structuring approaches like mind mapping
(Table 1). Relevant research has been active since 2010 in 12 projects (ongoing
till approx. 2020) on the local, national and EU levels, with our
department's participation.

┌───────────────┬───────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│Research part  │Purpose            │Approach (exemplified reference)         │
├───────────────┼───────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│               │Information structuring Wiki (c.f. e.g. Wiki Education       │
│Knowledge base │Foundation, n.a.)                                            │
│               │                                                             │
│               │Mind mapping (c.f. e.g. ThinkBuzan Ltd.)                     │
├───────────────┼───────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│               │                   │Key numbers (c.f. e.g. De Solia Price,   │
│               │                   │1963)                                    │
│               │Author cohorts     │                                         │
│Scientific     │                   │Clustering of authors (c.f. e.g. Moed et │
│               │Structures         │al., 2006)                               │
│structures     │                   │                                         │
│               │Topic mining       │Social Network Analysis (c.f. e.g.       │
│               │                   │Wellman, 1988)                           │
│               │                   │                                         │
│               │                   │NLP (c.f. e.g. Anaya, 2011)              │
├───────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│               │                   │Case studies (c.f. e.g. Yin, 2003)       │
│               │                   │                                         │
│               │                   │Expert Interviews (c.f. e.g. Gläser and  │
│               │                   │Laudel, 2009)                            │
│               │                   │                                         │
│               │                   │Observation (c.f. e.g. Lamnek, 2005)     │
│               │Data collection    │                                         │
│Usage practices│                   │Heuristic Frameworks (c.f. e.g. Kubicek, │
│               │Data analysis      │1977)                                    │
│               │                   │                                         │
│               │                   │Grounded Theory (c.f. e.g. Bryant and    │
│               │                   │Charmaz, 2010)                           │
│               │                   │                                         │
│               │                   │Qualitative Content Analysis (c.f. e.g.  │
│               │                   │Mayring, 2000)                           │
├───────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│               │                   │Literature Review (c.f. e.g. Cooper and  │
│Systematization│Expert opinion     │Hedges, 2009)                            │
│               │                   │                                         │
│               │                   │Group discussion (c.f. e.g. Lamnek, 2005)│
├───────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│               │                   │Usability Engineering (c.f. e.g. Nielsen,│
│               │                   │1993)                                    │
│               │User Experience    │                                         │
│Design         │Testing            │Questionnaires (c.f. e.g. Barnum, 2011)  │
│               │                   │                                         │
│               │                   │User observation (c.f. e.g. Tullis and   │
│               │                   │Albert, 2008)                            │
├───────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│               │                   │Project-based learning (c.f. e.g. Donelly│
│               │Educational design │and Fitzmaurice, 2005)                   │
│Education      │Assessment         │                                         │
│               │                   │Formative & surnmattye. (c.f. e.g. Dumit,│
│               │                   │2012)                                    │
└───────────────┴───────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────┘

Table 1. Brief overview of methodical approaches

Results

Considering a scholarly community on digital 3D reconstruction and modeling,
discourses on major conferences during the last 25 years were mainly led by
institutions from European Mediterranean countries, covering primarily
technological topics. In particular, statues and buildings in
Mediterranean countries dating from all periods Anno Domini deliver rich
content for such reconstruction (Fig. 1). Institutions with high numbers of
publications, connections to co-authors or the extraordinary importance to link
groups of researchers to each other can be identified on a structural level
(cf. Fig. 2). Due to the high complexity and team based workflows, aspects and
usage practices for communication, cooperation, and quality management are of
high relevance within 3D reconstruction projects. Especially if people with
different disciplinary backgrounds are involved, visual media are
intensively used to foster communication and quality negotiations (cf. Fig. 3),
for example by comparing source images and renderings of the created virtual
reconstruction. Furthermore, several projects successfully adopted highly
standardized conventions from architectural drawings for interdisciplinary
exchange (Munster, 2013). To support an organizational development, we ran five
workshops to identify ongoing research topics and challenges, involving around
100 researchers in total. Current challenges named (cf. Fig. 4) aim at
a research and development of sustainable and practicable approaches to access
wider scientific communities and audiences and include aspects such as widely
interoperable documentation and classification strategies and schemes, an
overarching cataloguing of projects, and the creation of objects as well as
strategies and technologies for an exchange between different technological
domains and approaches of usage. Regarding design implications for digital
environments, we investigated, for example, that relatively little visual
information is needed to allow observers to distinguish buildings from
each other or to identify a single building and gain information about its
spatial relation and shape (Munster et al., 2017b). Moreover, we adopted
and evaluated team project-based learning approaches to support student
education in digital 3D reconstruction (cf. Fig. 6). As observed in two courses
so far, a development of procedures and strategies for cooperation within
student project teams for creating virtual representations evolves slowly and
is mostly caused by emerging problems and urgent demands. Related competencies
are based highly on implicit knowledge and experience. As a consequence,
a teaching of implications and best practices prior to commencing a project is
less effective than coaching during the project work.

[378-1]

Figure 1. Types of 3D reconstructed and modelled artifacts (Sample: 478
publications on digital 3D modeling in humanities)

[378-2]

Figure 2. Accumulated Author-Co-Author Relations by institutions (TOP 10 in
Degree, Count, Betweenness

Centrality named, Sample: 3917 publications on digital 3D modeling in
humanities)

[378-3]

Figure 3. Exemplified modeling as well as quality control techniques.
Originally published in (Münster et al., 2017a).


assessment of practice-oriented aspects "capacity of making a model logic
transparent" beyond questions of humanities like learning, usability or
sustainable business models"

"tools and mechanisms for semantic annotation

"3D data viewers"    [anc]i modification of extant reconstructions"

"documentation of processes and their results"

"tools for versioning"


"suitable workflows and strategies used for the creation of digital
reconstructions"

"transfer and exchange between research and

practical use"


"development of knowledge and competencies"

"technologies and strategies on data interoperability"

"mapping of digital reconstruction projects"


Figure 4. (Selected) future challenges named for digital 3D reconstruction in
academic contexts (outcome from a workshop series involving around 60
international researchers).

[378-4]

Figure 5. Results from Freiberg Cathedral App educational project. Models:
Wachsmuth et al., 2014

Summary

Since it is our vision to establish digital 3D reconstruction as a scholarly
accepted and widely used research method in humanities, it seems to be crucial
to add a critically reflected methodological basis and anchor it in academic
culture. To draw this currently missing “big picture”, our department performed
research on digital 3D reconstruction within various projects by combining
both theoretically and practically grounded research parts. This comprises
research on scholarly communities, scholarly practices and
methodological recommendations as well as implications for interaction design,
teaching and dissemination.

